HYPERDATA DOT MODEL — BRAINSTORM FOR LATER

Current model

The dots are best described as volatility-normalized endpoint returns, not as
realized volatility divided by expected volatility.

For a lookback horizon h:

  realized move = abs((current mark - reference price) / reference price) * 100

  expected move = max(
    median absolute 5-minute return * sqrt(h / 5 minutes),
    0.05 * sqrt(h / 1 hour)
  )

  score = realized move / expected move

  score < 1.5       -> light
  1.5 <= score < 3  -> medium
  score >= 3        -> strong

The signed endpoint return determines direction: green when the current mark is
above the reference and red when it is below. The score controls only the shade
intensity.

What is theoretically sound

- Traders commonly use volatility-normalized returns, expected-move bands,
  z-scores, and square-root-of-time volatility scaling.
- Comparing an observed move with a volatility-derived expected move is a
  reasonable way to make different assets and horizons visually comparable.
- Median absolute returns are robust to isolated outliers.

Current limitations

- This is one endpoint-to-endpoint return, not realized volatility. Conventional
  realized variance sums squared high-frequency log returns across the complete
  interval; realized volatility is the square root of that sum.
- Median absolute five-minute return is a robust volatility proxy, not a
  standard-deviation estimate. Under normally distributed zero-mean returns,
  median(abs(return)) is about 0.6745 times sigma. The current model does not
  apply that calibration, so its score is not a true z-score.
- Square-root-of-time scaling assumes approximately independent returns and
  constant variance. Real markets have volatility clustering, jumps,
  autocorrelation, changing regimes, and intraday/overnight seasonality.
- The baseline is primarily derived from roughly the latest 24 hours of
  five-minute observations and is scaled as far as one week. A short recent
  regime may be a poor forecast for a long horizon.
- The current value is a live mark price while historical references come from
  candle closes, so the comparison is not guaranteed to be mark-to-mark.
- The 1.5 and 3 thresholds are intuitive visual cutoffs, not calibrated event
  probabilities. A strong dot does not mean a statistically valid three-sigma
  event.
- Dots across adjacent horizons overlap heavily and are therefore correlated;
  they should not be interpreted as independent signals.

Possible rigorous replacement

1. Persist a timestamped mark-price history and use mark prices for both the
   current and historical sides of every comparison.
2. Use log returns.
3. Estimate volatility with either:
   - realized variance from summed squared intraperiod log returns;
   - a calibrated robust estimator such as MAD divided by 0.6745; or
   - an EWMA, HAR-RV, or GARCH-style forecast when forecasting matters.
4. Account for volatility regimes, time-of-day effects, market closures, and
   overnight behavior rather than relying only on square-root-of-time scaling.
5. Estimate a separate empirical distribution for every asset and horizon.
6. Assign colors using historical percentiles, so the rubric has a concrete
   interpretation such as ordinary, unusual, and extreme for that exact asset
   and horizon.
7. Backtest stability, false-extreme frequency, and behavior during jumps before
   treating the dots as more than a visual monitoring aid.

Suggested future definition

  Each dot shows where the asset's current mark-to-mark return ranks within the
  historical distribution of returns for that same asset and lookback horizon.

This would be easier to interpret and more empirically defensible than treating
the current heuristic score as a calibrated probability or standard deviation.
